---
title: "Segregating sports by sex was always a flawed idea"
excerpt: "Society says men are better at sports. I say popular sports were merely designed by men, for men."
createdAt: "2024-11-22"
cw: >
  Please don't harrass me just because I had a sociopolitically complicated thought, kthxbye.
nocolor: true
css: |
  .indent {
    margin-left: 20px
  }
---

At the Paris 2024 Olympics, women's sports once again became a political
football. Not only is the scientific and public consciousness finally starting
to realise that the so-called sex binary isn't so binary, but the far-right
moral panic about trans people has reached such dizzyingly illogical heights
that they have started [harassing cisgender
women](https://edition.cnn.com/2024/08/02/sport/who-is-imane-khelif-olympic-boxer-intl/)
because they are too good at sports, or something.[^something]

[^something]: Yes I am aware that I am strawmanning the far-right, no I do not
    care.

But let's take a moment to question why we have segregated "women's sports" in
the first place. The motivation is somewhat clear, at least for the top level
of competition: promote the sporting accomplishments of women. But the basic
assertion that justifies this approach, namely "men are better at sports", is
not so easily justified. Meanwhile, sex segregation in sport actively advances
a narrative of male physical superiority, so it is imperative that we question
It thoroughly.

Evidence does seem to show that in the vast majority of commonly popular
sports, men win in mixed contests. But it can only be claimed that men are
better at sports in _general_ if we assume that these sports are representative
of the full category of possible sports.[^social] This assumption is hard to
justify, partly because "sport" is an extremely broad and ill-defined category
and partly because there are sociopolitical reasons to think this might not be
the case. I contest a new hypothesis: commonly popular sports are only
representative of sports which were designed and popularised by men -- and they
were designed for men to win.

[^social]: And, of course, if we disregard social influences. There are many
    examples of sports in which there is next to no physiological difference
    and yet there are few women at the top levels -- snooker, motorsports,
    target rifle shooting, etc. Some of this may be attributed to
    physiologically-driven differences in interest, but another limiting factor
    on the talent pool of women is social pressure.

Why would that be so? Well, why _wouldn't_ it be so? Every sport possible is
influenced in some way by physiology, and almost every popular sport in common
practice today was designed deep in the throes of patriarchy, when most women
were socially discouraged from inventing and competing in sports. So these
sports were designed by men, for men. Why would men design a sport in which the
finest athletes in the world were women? Even without conscious intent, it's
just the expected outcome that people design and popularise the things that
they are good at. If this hypothesis is true, male dominance in sport does not
follow from male physical superiority, it merely deifies the assumption of male
physical superiority.

Which brings us to today. Now, I'm not quite saying we should completely
desegregate sports. But the segregation that we do have should exist on a much
more sport-by-sport basis and use _measurable_ characteristics (which binary
sex is simply not) and enable competition by _all_ demographics. We have weight
classes in boxing, why not, for instance, have height classes in basketball?
Still, this is a secondary consideration; the most important thing for us to do
is to be courageous enough to invent and platform sports in which women (and
other underrepresented demographics) simply win in mixed contests.

But, I hear you say, surely such sports must be contrived, our male dominated
sports, like "who can run the fastest" are so simple and elegant! Oh, really?
If what you want is the simplest and most elegant show of physical ability,
I'll wager that it is simply "who can stay alive the longest", which, last time
I checked, women were winning by a huge margin. This doesn't do so well as
entertainment, but there are other simple sports already in contention in which
women hold the title -- for instance certain forms of gymnastics. Even in
running, there are indications that for ultra-long marathons (200 miles or
more), women may have [an advantage](https://runrepeat.com/state-of-ultra-running).

Gymnastics is perhaps a positive case study here.[^gymnastics] When women's
gymnastics was added to the Olympics, different disciplines were chosen in
order to better suit female physiology, and there is good reason to believe
that men would not outperform women in these disciplines. It seems that in part
this was able to happen because of the flexibility of gymnastics as a sport, in
contrast to other sports in which male dominance is more deeply linked with
their structure.

[^gymnastics]: Disclaimer, I know very little about gymnastics (although I
    obviously did do some research for this post). Please correct me if
    necessary in the comments.

Of course, this strategy doesn't _just_ dismantle the narrative of male
physical superiority, it also neatly sidesteps many of the problems that
transfeminine people have in sports. Even if it _were_ the case that trans
women displace cis women's sporting accomplishments (spoiler alert,
they don't in any meaningful way), this problem would essentially disappear if
the top levels of competition also included sports in which female physiology
is an advantage.

At the end of the day, which sports are popular is defined by what the TV
networks will show and call a sport and what the people will watch and play.
But even if we confine ourselves to displays of physical prowess, we as women
need not simply resign ourselves to a second best league. We can do better than
segregation.

## Further Reading

[Sport: Recreation or Competition?](https://tara-e-thoughts.blogspot.com/2024/08/sport-recreation-or-competition.html)

::: {.indent}
A very different but complementary angle on similar underlying problems.
:::

[The Question of Why We Ride](https://noahart.substack.com/p/the-question-of-why-we-ride)

::: {.indent}
An inward look at bicycle racing culture and its relations with trans people.
:::

[Trans People and Sports: Everything You Need to
Know](https://juliaserano.substack.com/p/trans-people-and-sports-everything)

::: {.indent}
The biology (and sociology) of it all.
:::
