---
title: "Oppressive Citationism"
excerpt: "We must not wait until we are done reading to write."
createdAt: "2024-07-28"
---

Whether writing on science, philosophy, or culture, society demands of us
"citationism". Our works must be referential, placing themselves alongside old
ideas, justifying their existence through contrast with or superiority over
those ideas. But while citationism is certainly commendable in its quest to
avoid repeated thought, in practice it often runs in danger of either
suppressing thought entirely, or reserving it solely for a handful of academics
too immersed in dusty old thoughts to come up with anything truly new.

I might get in trouble for claiming this, but in contrast to the hard sciences,
in philosophy everything is up for grabs[^sci]. We do not have a single
complete framework with which to describe or evaluate our experiences, morals,
or organisational structures; thus ideas formed in a near vacuum can often be
far more revolutionary than those formed through immolation by the literature.

[^sci]: That's not to say that citationism isn't also a problem in the
sciences.

This is not to say that we should ignore our academic history, and it's
certainly not anti-intellectual. Far from it. But we should comprehensively
understand our history as a _community_, not as individuals. We should each
read[^read] and read and understand the old and the contemporary ideas, but crucially
we should compose _as we go_, and trust that forces of discussion and
disagreement will lead us to the relevant insights in that which we have not
read, and inform what we read next. The easiest way to find the argument that
refutes yours is to publish yours. Let's leverage that.

[^read]: or watch, or listen, or whatever.

Oppressive citationism runs even deeper. Consider (ironically, here lies a
citation) the paper "Citationism as academic erudition and as a strategic
action"[^paper], which contains another argument:

[^paper]: Vizeu, Fabio. "Citationism as academic erudition and as a strategic action." Cadernos EBAPE. BR 22 (2024)

> Being erudite represents an important characteristic of the academic, causing
academic prose to be marked by an aura of sophistication and intellectual
elitism. When erudition manifests in the practice of citationism, it can
constitute a communicative distortion strategy instrumentalized to avoid or
minimize debate or more accurate argumentation.

Citationism evokes in the uninitiated reader confusion, a sense of inadequacy
to refute the stated arguments, and often even an inability even to understand
the arguments. Thus, the dominance of the writer (and/or the intellectual
hegemony) is preserved. Those familiar with the cited works are likely to be
part of the hegemony already, the rest of us have other things to do. To make
it worse, many of the most referenced philosophers are famously difficult to
understand. Take Hegel, so supremely unintelligible to the vast majority of the
populace that depressed philosophy students make memes about it:

<figure>
<video controls width="80%">
	<source src="./hegel.mp4" type="video/mp4">
	Video of Hegel in audiobook form being impossible to understand, overlaid with an anime character being in psychological pain.
</video>
<figcaption>
Source unknown
</figcaption>
</figure>

So, two practical commitments: Firstly, I reject any propensity to
self-suppress posts on this blog for lack of being well-read enough on the
topic. I will be wrong many times, but my ideas will be raw and fresh,
unburdened by excessive citationism. Secondly, I reject in all but extreme
cases any posts which cannot be understood without extensive prior reading.

And here is a request: this blog is likely to get more even more philosophical
and political in the near future. If you have any opinion on the topics, or
know of other people's that I might be interested in reading<a href="#fn2"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>, please
comment! I'm trusting in conversation to keep me to account. To those of you
who have been commenting already, whether publicly or in private, a sincere
thank you!
